README.md, before:

# PCMP_ITS_pipeline
This is a Snakemake pipeline for analyzing unpaired fungal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences

## Installation
To install, we assume you already have installed `Miniconda3` (https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html)
- Clone the repository:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/PennChopMicrobiomeProgram/PCMP_ITS_pipeline.git
```
- Create a conda environment and install the required packages:
```bash
cd PCMP_ITS_pipeline
conda create -n PCMP_ITS_pipeline --channel bioconda --channel conda-forge --channel defaults python=3.10
conda install --name PCMP_ITS_pipeline --file requirements.txt
```

- The following software also need to be installed into the new environment:
  - `dnabc` (https://github.com/PennChopMicrobiomeProgram/dnabc)
  - `primertrim` (https://github.com/PennChopMicrobiomeProgram/primertrim)
  - `brocc` (https://github.com/kylebittinger/brocc)
  - `heyfastq` (https://github.com/kylebittinger/heyfastq)
  - To install (dnabc as example):
  ```bash
  git clone https://github.com/PennChopMicrobiomeProgram/dnabc
  cd dnabc
  conda activate PCMP_ITS_pipeline
  pip install -e ./
  ```

## Required input files for the pipeline
To run the pipeline, we need
- De/Multiplexed Illumina reads

## How to run
- Create a project directory, e.g. `/scr1/users/tuv/ITS_Run1`
- Copy the files from this repository into that directory
- Edit `project_config.yml` so that it suits your project. In particular,
  - **all: project_dir**: Path to the project directory, e.g. `"/scr1/users/tuv/ITS_Run1"`
  - **all: mux_dir**: Directory containing multiplexed Illumina sequencing reads, which does not have to be in the project directory, e.g. `"/path/to/mux_files"`; if samples are already demultiplexed, just fill in demux_dir
  - **all: demux_dir**: Leave blank if want to demultiplex using this pipeline; otherwise, the directory containing demultiplexed R1/R2 read pairs, which does not have to be in the project directory
  - **all: mapping_file**: Mapping file of samples with barcode information for demultiplexing
  - **all: forward_direction**: TRUE/FALSE for using forward/reverse read for this pipeline
  - **demux: mismatch**: Number of allowable basepair mismatches on barcode sequence for demultiplexing
  - **demux: revcomp**: If `TRUE`, reverse complement barcode sequence before demultiplexing
  - **trim: f_primer**: Sequence of forward primer used for ITS PCR
  - **trim: r_primer**: Sequence of reverse primer used for ITS PCR
  - **trim: mismatch**: Number of allowable basepair mismatches on ITS PCR primers for trimming
  - **trim: min_length**: Minimum length of match during the partial matching stage
  - **trim: align_id**: Minimum percent identity to consider a primer match in vsearch alignment
  - **otu: expected_error**: Threshold for truncating reads 
  - **otu: otu_id**: Percent sequence identity for clustering reads into OTUs
  - **otu: threads**: Number of threads to use
  - **otu: chimera_db**: Path to UCHIME reference dataset for chimera detection (see https://unite.ut.ee/repository.php); leave blank if using mock DNA amplified with chimera primers
  - **blastn: ncbi_db**: Path to a local ncbi nt database
  - **brocc: taxonomy_db**: Path to brocc nt database created with brocc's `create_local_taxonomy_db.py`
- Edit congfig.yml:
  - **cluster:** and **default-resources:** to match your slurm cluster setup
  - **configfile:** Absolute path to the `project_config.yml` above
- To run the pipeline, simply `bash run_snakemake.bash`
- You can use the [skeleton.Rmd](Rmd/skeleton.Rmd) to create a basic bioinformatic report from the results
  
## Notes on BROCC
`create_local_taxonomy_db.py` may be used to install a local taxonomy db for faster processing

## Rules
### Demultiplexing
Input: Multiplexed Illumina sequencing files  
Output: manifest.csv, total_read_counts.tsv, demultiplexed fastq files
### Fastqc
Input: demultiplexed fastq files OR output reads from Primer trimming
Output: fastqc reports, concatenated fastqc_quality.tsv with all quality scores
*Note* Fastqc is done at beginning and end of quality control to show differences
### Primer trimming
Removes ITS forward and reverse primer sequences from reads  
Output: reads/(reads.log, top_{rf}_seqs_trimmed.txt, {rf}_trimmed_removed_counts.txt, {rf}_trimmed.fastq)
### OTU clustering
Create OTUs from amplicons using vsearch. Singletons are discarded for creating the OTUs, but used for the counts.  
Rules are based on this wiki: (https://github.com/torognes/vsearch/wiki/Alternative-VSEARCH-pipeline)  
Output: otu/otu_sorted.tsv
### BROCC
Determine the taxonomic assignments of the OTUs through a consensus based BLAST result (https://github.com/kylebittinger/brocc)  
Output: BLAST_BROCC_output/out_brocc/brocc.log

## Optional but sometimes necessary
`run_fastqc_report.py` is included to manually run the concatenation step for all the individual fastqc reports. This is because snakemake errors out when, for example, one of the samples has an empty report.

Commit message:

readme fully updated along with R markdown templates

README.md, after:

# PCMP_ITS_pipeline
This is a Snakemake pipeline for analyzing unpaired fungal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences

## Installation
To install, we assume you already have installed `Miniconda3` (https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html)
- Clone the repository:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/PennChopMicrobiomeProgram/PCMP_ITS_pipeline.git
```
- Create a conda environment and install the required packages:
```bash
cd PCMP_ITS_pipeline
conda create -n PCMP_ITS_pipeline --channel bioconda --channel conda-forge --channel defaults python=3.10
conda install --name PCMP_ITS_pipeline --file requirements.txt
```

- The following software also need to be installed into the new environment:
  - `dnabc` (https://github.com/PennChopMicrobiomeProgram/dnabc)
  - `primertrim` (https://github.com/PennChopMicrobiomeProgram/primertrim)
  - `brocc` (https://github.com/kylebittinger/brocc)
  - `heyfastq` (https://github.com/kylebittinger/heyfastq)
  - To install (dnabc as example):
  ```bash
  git clone https://github.com/PennChopMicrobiomeProgram/dnabc
  cd dnabc
  conda activate PCMP_ITS_pipeline
  pip install -e ./
  ```

## Required input files for the pipeline
To run the pipeline, we need
- De/Multiplexed Illumina reads

## How to run
- Create a project directory, e.g. `/scr1/users/tuv/ITS_Run1`
- Copy the files from this repository into that directory
- Edit `project_config.yml` so that it suits your project. In particular,
  - **all: project_dir**: Path to the project directory, e.g. `"/scr1/users/tuv/ITS_Run1"`
  - **all: mux_dir**: Directory containing multiplexed Illumina sequencing reads, which does not have to be in the project directory, e.g. `"/path/to/mux_files"`; if samples are already demultiplexed, just fill in demux_dir
  - **all: demux_dir**: Leave blank if want to demultiplex using this pipeline; otherwise, the directory containing demultiplexed R1/R2 read pairs, which does not have to be in the project directory
  - **all: mapping_file**: Mapping file of samples with barcode information for demultiplexing
  - **all: forward_direction**: TRUE/FALSE for using forward/reverse read for this pipeline
  - **demux: mismatch**: Number of allowable basepair mismatches on barcode sequence for demultiplexing
  - **demux: revcomp**: If `TRUE`, reverse complement barcode sequence before demultiplexing
  - **trim: f_primer**: Sequence of forward primer used for ITS PCR
  - **trim: r_primer**: Sequence of reverse primer used for ITS PCR
  - **trim: mismatch**: Number of allowable basepair mismatches on ITS PCR primers for trimming
  - **trim: min_length**: Minimum length of match during the partial matching stage
  - **trim: align_id**: Minimum percent identity to consider a primer match in vsearch alignment
  - **otu: expected_error**: Threshold for truncating reads 
  - **otu: otu_id**: Percent sequence identity for clustering reads into OTUs
  - **otu: threads**: Number of threads to use
  - **otu: chimera_db**: Path to UCHIME reference dataset for chimera detection (see https://unite.ut.ee/repository.php); leave blank if using mock DNA amplified with chimera primers
  - **blastn: ncbi_db**: Path to a local ncbi nt database
  - **brocc: taxonomy_db**: Path to brocc nt database created with brocc's `create_local_taxonomy_db.py`
- Edit congfig.yml:
  - **cluster:** and **default-resources:** to match your slurm cluster setup
  - **configfile:** Absolute path to the `project_config.yml` above
- To run the pipeline, simply `bash run_snakemake.bash`
- You can use the files in the `Rmd` folder to create a basic bioinformatic report from the results (assuming some skill with Rstudio / R)
  
## Notes on BROCC
`create_local_taxonomy_db.py` may be used to install a local taxonomy db for faster processing

## Rules
### Demultiplexing
Input: Multiplexed Illumina sequencing files  
Output: manifest.csv, total_read_counts.tsv, demultiplexed fastq files
### Fastqc
Input: demultiplexed fastq files OR output reads from Primer trimming
Output: fastqc reports, concatenated fastqc_quality.tsv with all quality scores
*Note* Fastqc is done at beginning and end of quality control to show differences
### Primer trimming
Removes ITS forward and reverse primer sequences from reads  
Output: reads/(reads.log, top_{rf}_seqs_trimmed.txt, {rf}_trimmed_removed_counts.txt, {rf}_trimmed.fastq)
### OTU clustering
Create OTUs from amplicons using vsearch. Singletons are discarded for creating the OTUs, but used for the counts.  
Rules are based on this wiki: (https://github.com/torognes/vsearch/wiki/Alternative-VSEARCH-pipeline)  
Output: otu/otu_sorted.tsv
### BROCC
Determine the taxonomic assignments of the OTUs through a consensus based BLAST result (https://github.com/kylebittinger/brocc)  
Output: BLAST_BROCC_output/out_brocc/brocc.log

## Optional but sometimes necessary
`run_fastqc_report.py` is included to manually run the concatenation step for all the individual fastqc reports. This is because snakemake errors out when, for example, one of the samples has an empty report.
